Today's interview is with Lester O'Bannon,
retired professor of mechanical engineering at
Texas A&M University. Professor O'Bannon, who is
88, retired from A&M in 1964. Today's
date is July 29, 1982. Let's begin, Professor
O'Bannon, by your telling us something about your
early years as a boy in Kentucky.
First thing I remember was William McKinley
getting shot when he was president. You were five
years old at the time? I was about five or six years
old. And I remember faintly the fact that the
Spanish-American War was on about that time. When
I was just a small child, I can recall seeing a
neighbor man in uniform parading around, showing
himself off in his front yard. And I guess that was
my very first impression of the Spanish-American
War, because I didn't know anything about what was
going on. You were born in May 1894 in Stanford,
Kentucky. That's right, May 5th.
We had the same birthday. Stanford, Kentucky.
That's S-T-A-N-F-O-R-D. I don't know how much you
want me to tell. How long you got to listen? How long
it takes. Did you live most of all your boyhood
years in Stanford, or did you move elsewhere? I
lived there. My address was there until I
graduated from college, and then I moved on from
there. And you graduated from the University of
Kentucky at Lexington in what year? In 1915. With a
bachelor's degree in mechanical engineering? A
degree of bachelor of mechanical engineering. It
was not bachelor of science, but just bachelor of
mechanical engineering, BME. That was the custom
in those days. How did you get interested in
engineering? I didn't. It was just always assumed
from the very beginning that I was going to go to
college and take engineering. Why?
I was always told that I was going to take
electrical engineering. My father was an MD. He
was a country doctor, very popular physician in
that community.
But his hobby was, I would say, cabinet making and
building. And the closest thing that he could
think of to that was engineering. And I'd fooled
around with some electrical equipment while I was
still in grade school or early high school. And
everybody assumed that I was going to be an
electrical engineer. And I went to college for
that purpose. But at the University of Kentucky in
those days, there was no such thing as an
Department of Electrical Engineering. There was
only Department of Mechanical Engineering,
in which electrical engineering courses were
taught. And although a fellow could specialize in
electrical engineering, he got his degree in
mechanical engineering.
There were other colleges there, such as mining,
metallurgy, civil.
But mechanical engineering at that time included
electrical engineering.
And I was asked to fill out a form indicating what
branch of engineering I wanted to be in. There was a
list of them there. And among that list was steam
engineering. And I had sort of taken a fancy to one
of the professors in the department who taught
steam engineering. And for some reason that I
can't explain, I just checked on that form, steam
engineering. And sure enough, after graduating a
few weeks, I got a letter from the dean, which was a
copy of letter that he had written to the
steel company in South Chicago. They had written
to the college asking for recommendations for
somebody be employed in their steam engineering
department. So I had checked steam on this form and
here came a request for a steam engineer. So the
dean recommended me.
So it was the first offer I'd had in just two or three
weeks after graduation. So I wrote back and
indicated I was interested in the job.
the detail. But anyhow, I ended up in South Chicago
in the steam engineering department of the South
Works of the U.S. Steel Corporation, or at that
time it was in Illinois. That was in 1915? 1915,
summer of 1915. At that time it was the Illinois
Steel Company, but it was a subsidiary of U.S.
Steel. Just like across the border into Indiana
was the Gehry Works, which is a subsidiary of the
U.S. Steel. And there were a couple of other steel
corporations there in South Chicago.
So I showed up there, and I could tell a look of
disappointment on their face.
If you'd have read this letter of recommendation
from my dean concerning me to the steel
corporation, you would have thought that I was
about a six and a half foot Irish giant. Of course,
the apostrophe in the name gave them that
implication. And
when I walked in there, weighing 120 pounds and six
and a half feet tall, you could just see the
consternation over the faces of everybody in the
office. And I had on a beautiful pink silk shirt and
a bow tie and so forth. I looked like anything but a
steel employee, I'll tell you that. Anyhow, they
had to accept me, and they got me up there for that
purpose. Well, I started in there with the title of
steam expert in the steam engineering
department.
How long did you stay there? Until late spring of
1918,
when I left them and went into the Army in the First
World War. Were you drafted? No, I volunteered. I
don't know why I wasn't drafted. I've often
wondered, but I think the reason was that in the
first place, I didn't look like a soldier. I looked
more like a high school kid. I've always said that
has been one of my handicaps all my life. I always
looked 10 years younger than I was.
I used to be kidding about that. I had a sister who
would look at a photograph of herself. And she'd
pop. I would be, oh, 24, 25 years old. And she says,
well, you look like you just graduated from high
school. Well, I've had to put up with that all my
life. Right now, at my age, I get out on the campus
here and can't anybody believe that I'm 88 years
old. I don't know what I look like, but according to
my friends, I don't look over maybe 75, something
like that. Which has always been a big joke to me.
I've had that to endure all my life. How long you
stayed in the Army, until 1919 or 1920?
I would have had to get in. I don't believe I would
have been drafted because the job I had there was a
semi-technical job. And I've always felt, I'm not
sure that this happened, that the draft board has
sort of been told, just leave this fellow alone. We
need him, you see. It was a specialized technical
job. And I was the only one in the whole plant that
did that work. I may be wrong about that. I used to
get on the train at 53rd Street in Chicago and ride
to 79th Street, where the office was. I'd be going
in the opposite direction to traffic, because the
traffic in those days was from the outside
communities towards the Loop downtown. But I was
going the opposite direction. There wouldn't be
over half a dozen people on the train, so I could see
everybody. And I looked, they were all old men.
There wasn't a single young fella on the train. And
I got a little bit self-conscious about it,
thinking, well, maybe as young as I was, I was in
good physical health and so forth, maybe I should
be in the Army instead of riding this train with
these old men. So I just got the notion one day and
went down to the draft board. And I told them, I
said, when is your next contingency leaving here
for camp? And they told me, they said, well, I wish
you'd put me in that list. I want to volunteer. And
they did. So I got on a train there and rode to
Rockford, Illinois. That's where they, in those
days, they called it, what did they call it?
name that had went by. But it's where the rookies
were taken in. And they were disciplined there for
a few weeks. And finally, they were sent to some
specific department. Or rather, what happened,
officers from other divisions would come there to
the camp. And these rookies were all lined up. And
they would come by. interview each fellow. And
their idea was to choose people to go into certain
divisions, and infantry, artillery, and so
forth.
So this one captain kept quizzing me. And he
learned that I was a college graduate. And I think
that's what convinced him. He chose me to go with
him in the artillery.
And
that's what I did. And
the next place I remember was Sparta, Wisconsin,
where they had a rifle range. I don't know if you
know where that is or not. It's near La Crosse, and
La Crosse is right on the Mississippi River
between Wisconsin and Minnesota. Sparta,
Wisconsin.
And I was definitely in the artillery then,
Battery B, 333rd Field Artillery.
And we had rifle practice there.
And we were there five or six weeks.
Then, of course, I don't know what happened, but
the whole group then of this Battery, Battery B,
left Sparta and we were put on the train to the east
coast. We went first to camp on Long Island, where
we stayed a few days, and then we were put on a boat
and shipped to Europe. When did you reach Europe?
Oh, let's see. Some summer of
May have been July, August, something like that.
Well, I never did get into action.
What happened was that we were in the heavy field
artillery.
in the guns we were to use until we got in France. We
landed in Glasgow, Scotland.
I was with a group of senior citizens here on campus
or at one of the hotels not long ago, and there was a
little group of people there talking about
traveling in England and Scotland, and most of it
was about Scotland. Everybody had been to
Edinburgh. I didn't say a word. And I didn't have
any use of it. I didn't need to say a word. Some woman
across the table says, have you been to Scotland?
And I said, well, I've been to Glasgow. And what
another word said. I couldn't tell them that I'd
been to Edinburgh, which is what they'd been
talking about, but I had been to Glasgow. I didn't
tell them I was there only about five or six hours.
We got off the boat of Glasgow, got on a train, and
rode down through England to Southampton, which
was on the Channel.
I don't know how much you use this you want to see,
I'm just rattling off. We were there at
Southampton for a few hours,
and we were Late that night, or after dark, we were
put on a boat
just across the channel. And I was, the next
morning we woke up right back where we had been, in
Southampton, and we started making inquiries,
and somebody who seemed to know what he was talking
about, one of the crew, boat crew or somebody, He
says, well, he says, we started for Cherbourg, but
we got chased back by U-boats. Well, that was quite
an experience, even though we hadn't experienced
it. So we stayed there all day long. And the next
night, we started across again. And this time, we
made it. We landed at Cherbourg.
I remember
it was the first time we'd taken a bath and had a
change of clothing since we left the States. This
was a shower bath, and you had just so many minutes
in there, and if you didn't get the soap washed off
at the proper time, you had to wipe it off with a
towel. They'd just shut off the water. That's how
scarce it was. Well, we were there in Cherbourg for
maybe overnight or something like that. Then we
were put on a train and we rode south through France
to a camp.
Southern France wasn't too far from the Spanish
border. The largest city was Bordeaux, which was
on the coast. And that's where we got our training
with the guns. We were 155 millimeter height
Snyder howitzers, which was a shell about six
inches in diameter. We'd never seen one of them
before. We'd never seen the guns. So
before we left the States, I had been made a
corporal. And soon after we got into France, I was
made a sergeant. And I was a sergeant of a gun
section, which included about,
oh, I'd say 24 men altogether. Three squads, eight
men per squad. And there were several of those
sections in the battery. So I was one among four,
five, or six sergeants. And of course, above us was
the top sergeant.
because you had no responsibility whatsoever.
You got your orders from the officers above,
captain, lieutenant, second lieutenant, and
then you passed them on to the corporals, and they
would pass them on to the men. That was the system.
So a sergeant didn't have to know anything other
than just how to translate a message from the
officers to the lower ranks. That's an
exaggeration. I did know something about it. As a
matter of fact, I knew as much about it as any man in
the battery.
You couldn't escape learning it. How long were you
there before you were sent back to the United
States? Well, of course, the armistice came in
November the 11th. We'd had a false alarm about a
week ahead of time. And we all celebrated the
armistice. So when it came on November the 11th, we
didn't pay a damn little attention to it. It just
made no impression whatsoever. It was a letdown,
because this false information that had been let
out there in the camp where we were a week ahead of
time, we'd already done the celebrating. So the
war didn't actually end until November the 11th.
By that time, as far as we'd be concerned, it had
been over for a week. So we loafed there in camp
until I believe it was Christmas Day. Or maybe the
day before Christmas, we marched from this camp to
Bordeaux. And on Christmas morning, we got on a
boat. And on New Year's Day, we got off of that boat
in New York City. About seven days coming back,
going over it took 14 days. Do you think that if the
U.S. had joined the League of Nations that some of
the problems that occurred after World War I might
have been avoided?
After World War I? No. You don't think the League of
Nations would have been any more effective than
the U.N.? No. The Germans had been defeated.
Tactically, militarily, economically, they
were defeated. But within themselves, they were
never defeated, and they were going to start a war
sooner or later. And they did. Do you think the
peace terms that were imposed on the Germans were
harsh? No, no, that didn't happen to them. They may
or may not have been, but it had nothing to do with
the Second World War. Okay, when you were back in
the United States in 1919, New Year's Day, what
happened? What did you do to pursue then? We just
waited around for another 30 days until we were
discharged. And then where did you go after you
were discharged? It was late in January when we
were discharged. So I was in the Army altogether,
I'd say about ten
months, something like that, nine or ten months.
About three months in France, and the rest of the
time in this country, either before or after being
in the Army. Where did you go after you were
discharged here? Well, that's a long story. Well,
just ultimately, where did you go? I had a sister
who lived in Elyria, Ohio.
E-L-Y-R-I-A. It's about 20 miles west of
Cleveland.
And her husband was...
What do you call him?
He ran the city government down. What did he call
those people in those days? City manager. City
manager, something like, some title similar to
that. I don't think they sent him city manager, but
some other title.
And he knew some businessmen there in Elyria.
Well, I went by Elyria just as a means. And he was the
city manager of Elyria or of Cleveland? Elyria. I
was on my way home to Kentucky and just went by
Elyria to visit my sister. I had shipped my
personal belongings to her when I left Chicago to
go into the Army. I had some books and other things
that I had shipped to her. So I went by there and
picked that up and then went on to Kentucky. But my
brother-in-law had his acquaintances there of
area businessmen.
He knew the superintendent of the blast furnace
department in the National Tube Company, Lorain,
Ohio, which was right on the lake. That was the
industrial city for that part of northern Ohio. Is
that Lorain with two R's? No. L-O-R-A-I-N-D? I
think so, yeah. I'm not sure.
where the top personnel lived who worked for the
steel company in Elyria. So I commuted, when I got
the job, I commuted from Elyria to Lorain and
worked there at the National Tube Company. And I
got that job, as I say, through the fact that my
brother-in-law had acquainted with some of the
officers, and they found out that I was looking for
a job. And what really got me the job was that the
work that I had done at the South Works plant in
South Chicago was the kind of work for which they
wanted a man, to hire a man there at Lorraine. So
since I had that experience, it was easy for me to
get the job.
months at the most. I wasn't happy with it. It was a
letdown from what I had done in South Chicago. In
South Chicago, I had charge of certain accounts
which included every department in the whole
plant. And Lorraine, with the National Tube
Company,
which was a rather narrow line of duty compared to
what I'd had in South Chicago, so it didn't
fascinate me in the slightest. Then what did you do
after that?
Well,
there was a great building boom going on at that
time. See, this is back in 1919. World War was over,
business began to take up, to pick up, and a
lot of construction work going on. And as I said,
almost in the beginning, I had grown up in the
construction business, you might say, because
that had been a hobby of my father, buying and
selling houses. remodeling them and so forth and
so on. Most of the labor he used for that purpose was
patients of his who hadn't paid their accounts, so
he'd get work out of
them. Well, anyhow, there was a building boom
going on there in Elyria, and my brother-in-law
sort of encouraged me to get into that. My father,
when he heard about it, sort of gave me some
encouragement. As a matter of fact, he lent me some
money to buy a lot there. And I was going to build on
that lot. In the meantime, before I reached that
point, I built a residence for my brother-in-law
and another residence I built for one of the men I
had known at the steelworks, Lorraine. And this
third house was one which would have belonged to me
with the money that the father lent me to buy the
lot. So, it looked as though I was going to be a
building contractor.
I went on home on vacation after being in the army.
And
Excuse me, but this story's got to stop someplace.
I can't go on forever. Well, after, where did you
finally? I went, let me tell you how I got into the
education business. All right, let's just move to
that. On my way home from Larry, Ohio to Stanford,
Kentucky, I stopped at Lexington and visited the
university where I had graduated. 1920? Yeah.
This was in 1920, where I had graduated five years
earlier, and this was the first time I had been back
there. So I went by the campus, and I visited some
old professors in the department that I had
remembered from five years earlier, and saw some
new buildings and so forth, and ended up in the
dean's office. And just like you and I are talking
now, The dean and I started talking about myself.
He wanted to know what I had been doing. So I didn't
take this long, I don't think. But I told him about
my experience at South Chicago with the Steel
Corporation and being in the Army and then working
for the National Tube Company in Lorain and so
forth and so on. And I about wore him out. He wore me
out. So we got up and we started out. And I don't
know, we was halfway from the entrance to the
building to the pavement, sidewalk, when he said
something about teaching. I don't exactly know
what. Anyhow, I said, well, you know, I've often
thought I'd like to teach. He grabbed me by the arm
and he almost shook me off my feet. He says, you're
just the man I'm looking for. You're just the man
I'm looking for. He said, was $2,000 interest you?
Well, that was for 10 months' work, but $200 a
month, which is more than I'd ever made anywhere in
all my life up to that time. So that was no problem.
The question was whether I really wanted to teach
or not. Anyhow, I went on home
and talked to my father about it, and he wasn't too
interested in that. He was thinking about backing
me financially in this building profession,
industry up in Northern Ohio, you see. That was his
hobby. And he could visualize my doing that. But I
was truthful when I remarked to the dean that I had
often thought that maybe I'd like to teach. And he
had just lost his man in the department in who was
teaching the sort of stuff for which I
specifically had the experience with the Steel
Corporation. And that's what he meant when he
says, I'm just the man you're looking for, that I'm
looking for, just the man I'm looking for. Well, I
finally did accept and started teaching there.
And you were teaching what? 1st of September in
1920. And you were teaching what? In the
Mechanical Engineering Department. My major
subjects were thermodynamics,
heat power engineering, steam engines, steam
boilers, and things like that. How long did you
stay teaching in class? Oh, my goodness.
I had different assignments, different duties.
But I would say I always taught. even though I was
doing something else, research or something like
that. I never considered myself as being away from
teaching from 1920 to 1946
at Lexington. And then I had two years at the
University of Michigan. 1946, 47, 48 and I came
here in the fall of 48. University of Michigan at
where? University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. Okay,
what were some of the changes that you saw at the
University of Kentucky at
Well, you see, there was a depression. First,
there was a considerable expansion through the
20s, economic prosperity.
Then there was a stock market crash in 29. Then
there was depression through the 30s. And then
there was the World War. For us, that was from,
what, 41 to 45. So a lot of things happened in that
period.
When I started in there in 1920, the college
professors ran everything. We had a top
administration, but they were just figureheads.
Their main job was looking after the finances and
collecting fees and making up schedules,
budgets, and so forth, and paying the proceeds out
to the state. We had a Senate, which consisted of
all professorial ranks from assistant professor
up, including the deans. We had an assembly. Well,
first, that Senate met once a month. Then there was
an assembly, which included every employee of the
university, which assembled once a semester.
That was mostly just a social gathering.
Then there was a
committee of deans. That wasn't the name they went
by, but it consisted of all the deans of all the
colleges, plus the business manager and the
registrar and the president. The president
presided.
Then There was the board, what we called board of
trustees at that time, board of directors, other
places.
And then the state legislature. You had the state
legislature, the board of directors, the... What
you're saying is that this administrative
bureaucracy took the power away from the college
professors. I'm telling you what the setup was.
State legislature, board of trustees, the top
echelon among the deans and administrators, the
Senate, which included all of the faculty,
assistant professor and above, and the Assembly,
which included all employees of the college. The
business of the whole college was divided or split
among those divisions of administration. But the
college professors themselves practically ran
everything, Nothing was ever done that wasn't
approved by the Senate, which included assistant
professors, associate professors, professors,
heads of departments, and the deans. It included
the teaching personnel. That changed
drastically and dramatically during the
Depression.
Because during the Depression, it was the
finances that were important. You didn't care
about that so long as we had a job OK. And nobody
cared whether we were teaching good or bad. It was a
question of having a job, holding a job. So that the
business of operating the university switched
from education to the monetary aspects of getting
enough money to pay the salaries of the people who
ran the college. So that meant that the
responsibilities shifted from the lower ranks to
the people at the top,
particularly the board of directors, who had
contact with the legislators and the politicians
throughout the state and so forth and so on, who
could supply the financial income that was
needed. So education per se dropped out of the
picture. And money became the important
consideration. Where were you going to get the
money? Did you get your advanced degree at the
University of Kentucky at Lexington? Well, I got
my M.E. degree there, yeah. What year?
Well, there's a story about that. If you were a
member of the Senate, you could not be given a
degree because you couldn't give a degree to
yourself because the Senate gave degrees. Since I
started out as an assistant professor, went on to
associate professor, professor, head of the
department,
and gotten that far by the middle 30s, I never had a
chance to get a degree there. I'd have to leave
Kentucky and go someplace else. But
in the middle 30s,
The
dean of agriculture and director of the
Agriculture Experiment Station was trying to
hire one of my men from under me to
look after some of the mechanical engineering
aspects of a new laboratory he was building for the
Agriculture Department. And this young man did
not want to be transferred. Well, I was a little bit
unhappy with things at that time, middle of the
Depression. And in the meantime, my old boss, dean
of engineering, had died. And a new man had come in.
And I wasn't very happy. So I learned that this
young man didn't want to take this job. I just
thought came to me, well, by golly, I'm just going
over there and apply for that job myself. And I did
that and I got it. My salary was pretty good at that
time. I was head of the department and they
couldn't pay me my current salary. But the
president of the university fixed that. He said,
well, that's easy. We just divide his salary
between agriculture and engineering. So to make a
long story short, I spent 10 years there from 1936
to 1946
as a research mechanical engineer in the College
of Agriculture. I went there to design this
laboratory, which included a substantial
investment in a lot of mechanical equipment. And
that took longer than we anticipated because we
couldn't get some of the equipment that we needed,
so that ran into the second year. And then I got
involved in some other mechanical phases of that
department, and my duties there just grew and
expanded so that I wound up spending ten years
there. And as I've said before, that it was in fact
10 of the most pleasant years of all my experience.
Why? Just imagine yourself as being the one
mechanical engineer among a group of all those
agriculture specialists, both animal and
vegetable. And you were acting as a consultant to
them. And you had no competition. You were the one.
And I'm telling you, it was a lot of fun, and I had a
lot of pleasant experiences there, and I did a lot
of work for them. Now where was this? This is in
Lexington, Kentucky. My work pertained chiefly
to the tobacco industry, although that wasn't in
all of it. I designed two laboratories for spin
metal work on the curing of tobacco.
data on what was happening to the tobacco going
through different weather conditions. I had a
weather station which included outdoor
temperatures, wet-bubble temperatures where I
could get dew points and relative humidity, wind
velocity, wind direction, and so forth. I had
almost a complete weather station. which I
devised myself, built some of the equipment, and I
would,
in the tobacco season in particular, curing
season, I would keep these records and try to
relate what was happening to the tobacco to the
outside weather conditions.
So, This change in position, although I really
never stopped teaching,
made it possible for me to suggest to the powers
that be that since I was no longer a member of the
Senate, I could get an advanced degree. So I did
that. I wrote a dissertation, applied for a
degree, and so forth,
It was concerned with this laboratory that I'd
built and designed and built for them. And I used it
as the basis for the dissertation.
It was a description of an engineering job, which
they accepted as being suitable for an
engineering degree. When did you marry? Oh, that
was back in 1922.
My wife and I started teaching at the University of
Kentucky, but the same year. What did she teach?
September of 1920.
Well, what did she teach? First place, she
graduated from Mount Holyoke College with a
bachelor's degree. That's in Massachusetts. I
don't know where you know where that is. It's a
women's college.
She spent four years there and got a bachelor's
degree. And then she went to Cornell University,
got a master's degree.
And she was employed at the University of Kentucky
in the fall of 1920 in the zoology department. And
her teaching specialty was histology and
embryology,
which worked that she had taken chiefly at
Cornell.
And we belonged to a group of faculty there that
socialized and had parties and so forth and so on.
We got acquainted. And we married in 1922.
It was two years after we had started teaching. Why
did you decide?
I don't know whether you're interested in all this
junk or not. Just make it free. You don't have to
give all the time. Well, it's a trouble. It can't be
free. It's involved.
Back in the middle 20s, I needed some inflammatory
assistance. And I remember the former student.
who was excellent at writing laboratory reports.
I don't know if he was good at anything else or not.
When he turned in a laboratory report and I read it,
he hit every point